# response to Blumenstock
Will Stubner

January 27th

I agree with Blumenstock that efforts to use big data to aid international development have often fallen short of their stated goals, often because of a misunderstanding of both the power and potential of big data, as well as a lack of understanding of local cultures where development work is taking place, and underestimating the social, political and economic obstacles that hamper normal development, even if aided by big data. One iniitative he mentions is the laptop for every child, a program that sought to connect every child in the world to the internet. While admirable, it ran into many pitfalls, inclduing culturaul norms that were initially resistant to the idea, as well as technological challenges such as a lack of power. The lack of regulation can also lead to predatory use of big data projects, such as in Kenya, where the mobile money system has brought a finnancial system to a country that had previously lacked one. However, it was difficult to regulate this new system, leading to finnancial crimes and fraud. I agree that it was blindly optimistic to think that data would radically alter the international development field. While collecting data about vulnerable populations is important, the use of that data, and ensuring that it is accurate and relavent, is more important in improving the overall quality of human life in any area. I agree that transparency is important for both companies and local groups, but I believe that in many cases even with all the transparency in the world, people will still not really understand how development projects work. This means that public outreach about the uses and effects of big data is needed. Finally, I believe that the most important thing to consider when talking about big data and devlopment is balancing local norms with the mostly western influenced big data projects. Many areas that are most in need of development are also deeply conservative areas, with religious and social traditions that dominate daily life. It is of the utmost importance that development workers know and understand these norms, and work to intergrate them into their development plans.
